-----Section on the importance of gravitational wave astronomy and the recent discovery of gravitational waves.

After exactly a century long wait since the theoretical prediction of gravitational waves by Albert Einstein, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory (LIGO) collaboration finally announced the first direct detection of gravitational waves on February 11 2016, thus paving the way to a new era of gravitational wave astronomy.

The most precise measurement ever made by mankind.

Gravitational waves unlike electromagnetic radiation cannot be shielded by any intervening objects which allows us to see events in locations such as teh galactic center that would otherwise be obscured by matter.

Now we can probe extremely energetic events (more energetic than all the stars in the universe put together) in regions of strong gravity which were inaccessible up to now.



-----Section on the importance of high performance simulations and data-intensive computing that is efficient and scalable. (Blue Waters, GPUs)

Einstein's equations of General Relativity are highly nonlinear and impossible to solve analytically (with the exception of a few simple scenarios). Hence the only method at our __ is to try to obtain a numerical approximate solution to study the behavior of objects in strong gravitational fields. Numerical relativists were one of the first people to adopt the use of supercomputers for academic research.

Current simulations are very expensive and slow therefore the catalogues available are very sparse.

Initial simulations of binary black holes systems failed but improvements in the last decade made simulations possible.

However with the ever increasing computational power of supercomputers (soon to enter the exascale regime) we now have the ability to do extremely precise simulations of almost every kind of scenario we can imagine.

Due to the extremely weak amplitudes of gravitational waves, our detectors are capable of detecting only the brightest of the gravitational waves in the universe. These strong waves are only created during the interaction of the densest compact objects such as neutron stars and black holes. Due to the high gravitational fields involved in the process we cannot use a linearized weak field approximation to solve the equation of general relativity. Solving the fully relativistic equations are only possible with numerical methods and they involve a huge amount intensive computation which requires some of the best supercomputers of our time.

-----Section on the why binary black hole systems are important (have been detected, strongest  signals, tests of strong-field general relativity, high event rate)

Most energetic events in the universe.

Quantum gravity??

-----Section on why systems with eccentric orbits are of interest. Astrophysical properties, investigating stellar environment, perturbations can cause electromagnetic counterpart.

Although most binary black hole systems quickly lose eccentricity due to gravitational wave emission in the early inspiral stage, external perturbations through interactions with the environment or with a third compact object can cause noticeable eccentricities in the orbits up to times close to the merger.

(Event rate estimation for eccentric systems)


-----Section on Einstein Toolkit and Cactus Framework including its history and connection to UIUC and NCSA (One of the first groups to simulate black hole mergers. Led to the origin of NCSA) - Mention Ed and Gab 



-----Section on the need for more numerical relativity simulations - open-source, dearth of publically available codes, scalable to exascale.


No prior numerical relativity simulations with highly eccentric orbits (>.1) exist.

Validate semi-analytic model that I developed with Eliu (see figure).

More simulations increases accuracy of fits and semi-analytic models.

Simulation code can be extended to mergers involving combinations of supermassive black holes, neutron stars, white dwarfs and other exotic compact objects.


------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

With the first gravitational waves being detected recently by LIGO, we can expect a huge influx of gravitational wave data in the immediate future. High performance numerical relativity simulations are crucial to predict the signature of gravitational waveforms generated by various astrophysical phenomena involving exotic objects such as the merger of binary black holes or neutron stars. Due to the complex nature of Einstein's equations of general relativity, these simulations require extreme amounts of computational resources. The analysis of the big data reaching the LIGO detectors in order to filter noise and extract multiple gravitational waveforms and then estimate various astrophysical parameters, also requires a lot of data-intensive computing. 

Currently there are only closed source state-of-the art numerical relativity simulation codes, such as the Spectral Einstein Code developed by the sXs collaboration (RIT), which can be used to predict the gravitational waves emitted by binary black hole mergers. The waveforms generated by this group were the ones that were used to classify the recent detection by LIGO as a merger of black holes and to estimate their masses, spins, and other properties (see figure for the numerical relativity fits). 

Thus there is a need to create open-sourced simulations codes, that can be scaled to run on HPC clusters and more powerful supercomputers such as Blue Waters, in order to corroborate the waveforms generated by the SEC code as well as to promote the spirit of the scientific method by completely revealing the simulations codes. 

Numerical relativity simulations of these systems are extremely expensive and time-consuming to run. Because of this only a very sparse sample of the parameter space has been covered by previous simulations. LIGO relies on various analytic, semi-analytic models as well as statistical fits in order to fully cover the remaining region. Various free parameters in these semi-analytic models are obtained through fitting with NR simulations Therefore increasing the size of the publically available catalogues by adding numerical relativity simulations of a wide range of astrophysical systems would allow us to create and calibrate better semi-analytical models that can quickly generate reasonably accurate waveforms that cover the entire spectrum of possible parameter values that fall within the detection threshold of LIGO as well as other upcoming gravitational wave detectors such as LISA.